Energy Security and Net Zero
Committee
Oral evidence: Energy resilience, HC 171
Wednesday 3 June 2026
Ordered by the House of Commons to be published on 3 June 2026.
Watch the meeting
Members present: Bill Esterson (Chair); Ms Polly Billington; Sir Christopher
Chope; Lizzi Collinge; Torcuil Crichton; Graeme Downie; Bradley Thomas; Claire
Young.
Questions 137 - 206
Witnesses
I: Chloe Oakshett, Maritime Lawyer, Addleshaw Goddard LLP and Director,
Scottish Maritime Cluster; Elisabeth Braw, Senior Fellow, Atlantic Council; and
Graham Skinner, Health, Safety & Security Policy Manager, Offshore Energies UK
(OEUK).
II: Deborah Petterson, Director of Resilience and Energy Management, NESO;
and Stuart Okin, Director for Cyber Regulation and Emerging Technologies,
Ofgem.
Examination of witnesses
Witnesses: Chloe Oakshett, Elisabeth Braw and Graham Skinner.
Q137 Chair: Welcome to this morning’s session of the Energy Security and Net
Zero Select Committee inquiry into energy resilience. We welcome our
first panel. Please introduce yourselves.
Elisabeth Braw: My name is Elisabeth Braw. I am a Senior Fellow at the
Atlantic Council and also the author of the upcoming book “Undersea
War”, which is about exactly what we will be talking about here, which is
undersea cables and pipelines.
Chloe Oakshett: Good morning. My name is Chloe Oakshett. I am a
maritime lawyer. I practise in the shipping team at Addleshaw Goddard,
which is an international law firm. I am also the Director of the Scottish
Maritime Cluster, which is a Scottish trade body for maritime businesses.
My expertise lies at the intersection of energy infrastructure and the legal
framework governing the marine environment. That includes the
deployment, maintenance and protection of assets such as wind farms
and subsea cables. Some of the work that I do relates to classified
matters but I am happy to follow up with the Committee afterwards in
any way if that information cannot be shared here today.
Graham Skinner: Good morning. I am Graham Skinner. I am the
Health, Safety and Security Policy Manager at Offshore Energies UK,
which is a trade association that represents 450-plus members across the
energy sector, including oil and gas, offshore wind, CCS and hydrogen.
Our members are the operators of infrastructure and the supply chain
that supports that.
Q138 Chair: Thank you all very much indeed for joining us and you are
welcome. We look forward to your evidence. The National Energy System
Operator told the Joint Committee on the National Security Strategy that
the conflict in Ukraine has demonstrated that targeting energy
infrastructure is part of military doctrine. I will start with Elisabeth. How
resilient is the UK’s energy infrastructure to current risks of both physical
and cyber-attacks?
Elisabeth Braw: The first thing to bear in mind or to look at is how
Russia has decided to use means, other than military ones, to weaken
other countries. In Ukraine they are seeing it in conjunction with military
means but when it comes to countries like the UK, Russia uses
exclusively non-military means so far. Those means can be easy to
detect, such as cases of sabotage, and they can also be much harder to
detect, and they can be almost impossible to attribute to Russia. That is a
longwinded way of saying that the UK energy infrastructure is targeted or
is accessed in different ways by adversarial activity or by suspicious
activity and we may or may not be able to attribute it to Russia but we
are seeing an increase in such activity.
So far the UK has held up well, and it is important to remember that no
UK undersea cables have been subjected to or have been cut in
mysterious circumstances where Russia seems to have been the
perpetrator so far. From my perspective, the most important thing to
bear in mind is that the Russian leadership, and potentially the leadership
of other countries, feel at liberty to target energy infrastructure in ways
that were not the case five, 10, 20 years ago. Once you have given
yourself the liberty of targeting other countries’ infrastructure, you can
proceed as you wish and the targeted country just has to strengthen its
defences. If they call Russia out, it is not going to be embarrassed.
Q139 Chair: We have seen Russian submarines circling North sea pipelines as
well as cyber threats. I take it that these are the sort of examples you
are thinking of.
Elisabeth Braw: Exactly. In the recent example you are referring to,
when Russian submarines loitered above UK undersea infrastructure for
an extended period of time, Defence Secretary John Healey called it out,
rightly so, but I think it caused no embarrassment in Russia. In fact, the
activity has continued, so it clearly didn’t cause any embarrassment.
Once you have put yourself in the position that the Kremlin has done of
not being embarrassed by being found out, you have options available to
you that respectable countries would not have.
Q140 Chair: Does our mix of energy resources help make us more resilient,
which again is something that NESO suggests?
Elisabeth Braw: Yes. Since we are in the Energy Security and Net Zero
Committee, I think it is important to remember that the variety of energy
sources is a source of strength. Individual energy sources and
installations may be targeted but the more variety we have or the more
diverse the supply is, the better chances we have of getting through
whatever it is that Russia or others may think up. Again, it is to the UK’s
credit that no cables or pipelines have been successfully damaged by
Russia or any other hostile state so far. If it were to happen, the breadth
of the energy production in the UK is an advantage.
Q141 Chair: Thank you. Chloe, what is your take on what we have discussed
so far?
Chloe Oakshett: On energy resilience, I will speak to offshore and the
maritime aspects only. It is really important to say to the Committee
from a legal point of view that we are quite restricted in what we can do
to protect our energy infrastructure outside of the 12-mile limit. The
Committee will be aware that our territorial waters run to 12 miles, and
of course the UK has important assets outside of that. We do have legal
rights in our EEZ but really we are talking about very valuable assets that
are out at sea in uncertain waters.
The rule of law on the high seas is UNCLOS, the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, and the rule within the 12-mile limit is
our own jurisdictional law. What we are able to do further afield where
many of our very valuable assets are is quite different to the control that
we have within the 12-mile limit. That means that we are looking at very
expensive equipment far out in an uncertain environment that we have
very limited legal controls over, and of course that has an impact.
Under UNCLOS and article 60, you can have 500 m around an installation
where you can restrict freedom of navigation, but that is unusual. All
states have an entitlement to freedom of navigation on the high seas,
meaning that every vessel can go everywhere, with certain restrictions
but these are minimal. Energy assets are very valuable assets. It is only
in some circumstances that we can put this 500 m cordon, and of course
you can’t fence it, so we are in very different territory to on-land assets.
You have the 500 m but how do you enforce that around your valuable
asset? You have very limited resources to enforce it. It is probably a
useful deterrent for legitimate actors at sea.
Q142 Chair: I am sorry to interrupt. What steps should the Government take
to improve protection?
Chloe Oakshett: The process for amending the international law of the
sea is extremely complex and requires international co-operation. It is
not realistic to imagine that we can respond as we would like to on that.
Q143 Chair: There is not very much from a legal point of view?
Chloe Oakshett: No, we are restricted but there are things that we
could do to improve our resilience with our responsiveness to this. If we
accept that we are in a very uncertain environment and we accept that
there are limitations to how we can operate within that, a way of
improving things might be to look at our own domestic law and how we
respond to that. We have good means of responding in a crisis that are in
place. We have the Civil Contingencies Act and powers of requisition,
which are a Crown prerogative. We can look at how we use these and we
can certainly look at what is available to us in the UK to deploy quickly to
defend our assets at sea or to respond where they are impacted, where
there is a rupture or disruption.
Q144 Chair: Thank you. Graham, what is your take on how we can improve
the protection of our assets, especially those out at sea?
Graham Skinner: For the last 60 years we have had an offshore
industry that has been incredibly resilient and it has been fundamental to
UK energy security, as it is still today. We will continue to require oil and
gas to 2050 and if we are going to use it, we should definitely produce it.
Our remoteness is part of the reason we have that resilience but our
remoteness from Westminster and from the decision making sometimes
leaves us out of some of the tactical decision making. We already deal
with safety risks offshore, such as drifting vessels towards installations.
We have emergency response vessels on site and we manage the 500 m
zone very effectively. The recent Granite Resolve exercise that we
conducted in collaboration with the Department demonstrated that those
safety practices over the 60 years have made us very resilient to the
threats that we face today, whether safety risk or security threat.
However, the exercise also demonstrated that we are somehow unsighted
on how those threats might develop in the near future and that is an
interesting area that we are very keen to work with Government to
explore: what might those threats escalate to and how might we respond
to that? Once we are in a war environment that is something entirely
different, but we probably have some period of time in this sub-threshold
threat environment with the escalation of existing challenges that we are
seeing.
Q145 Chair: Is there anything you can say to us in public at this stage about
what you would like to see or what you think is achievable?
Graham Skinner: Absolutely. The first thing that we need to achieve is
taking the plurality out of the debate about energy altogether and
realising that we need all energy sources to ensure that we have a
resilient economy going forward. We need to understand that the
foundation of safe and secure businesses is commercial stability, so we
need to make sure that we have a regulatory regime and a fiscal regime
that supports companies so that they can invest in security measures as
they determine. We need to increase our collaboration across all sectors.
There is some great work being done by NESO, who you are speaking to
after us, but we need to get to the point where we have NPSA providing
subsector pictures and support and then we are well placed to respond.
Q146 Sir Christopher Chope: Graham, you and I were on the same panel at
the Spectator security conference on Monday. One of the issues that
came out of that seemed to be the lack of joined-up work between the
Government and the security services and the operators in the North sea.
We heard from Botan Osman, who was also on the panel. He is the CEO
of Restrata and 65% of the North sea operations are his clients who he
advises. It seemed from talking to him and what was said at the
conference that we are in two separate silos. He is in the private sector
advising private sector companies that are paying for his services, but he
is unable to get access and individual clients of his are unable to get
access to the same information that must be available to the security
services. What do you think can be done to have more joined-up working
on these issues?
Graham Skinner: We have a governance challenge in this space. While I
have to recognise the excellent work of the Department, and particularly
the state threats team, they are at times limited by resource, which can
be a bit of a bottleneck. If we look at the ways that we could improve
governance in this space, designating offshore energy installations as
critical national infrastructure would be the easiest way to access existing
UK governance for critical energy facilities.
We could also look to other neighbours. The centre-left Government in
Norway is very positively behind its traditional energy industry and very
supportive. They have a maritime security forum that brings the industry
and the security services together directly without the arm’s length link
between Government, which increases situational awareness right across
the sector from fishermen right the way through to energy companies.
The fishermen should not be underestimated in their importance. After
all, they played a vital role in Ireland when the Russians were due to
conduct war games in their territorial waters. I think we need to look at
the maritime space as a whole and not break it down into individual silos.
Elisabeth Braw: I want to mention the example of Taiwan, which has
had several incidents of suspicious cable damage. The first few times, or I
should say the first many times, the cables were damaged and then it
was documented by the coastguard and inevitably the ships that seemed
to have caused the cuts had long left. Then Taiwan introduced new
legislation that compels cable operators to immediately notify the
Government in case of any suspicious variation in what their cables are
transmitting. A few months ago, when the Taiwanese coastguard was
inspecting a vessel that seemed to be behaving suspiciously, they wanted
it to leave Taiwanese waters and while the coastguard was doing that, it
received a notification from Chunghwa, which is the Taiwanese telecoms
provider, saying a cable had been cut. The coastguard was able to
intervene essentially at the crime scene because Chunghwa had notified
the Government instantaneously, as instructed.
I think that sort of solution would be an option for the UK as well,
including in the exclusive economic zone, where you can’t do very much
as a coastal state but if the Government can be there or intervene
immediately when a fault happens, they can try to convince the
suspicious vessel to move into territorial waters and then you try to
question the crew, which is better than not being able to do very much at
all.
Q147 Sir Christopher Chope: Do you think this information sharing should be
going both ways? It seems as though the Government and the security
services often know more than some of the private operators and there is
not enough information sharing.
Elisabeth Braw: Yes, a hotline should go both ways, and it should be a
hotline with a designated recipient on both sides, but it is the case that
the Government, with their intelligence services, know more than many
operators do. I think that the realisation has also been slow among many
private sector operators in different sectors that it is a changed world and
that anybody can become the victim of geopolitically laid activity. It is not
as if your company has to be controversial from the Russian perspective.
It is just if your company happens to be a convenient target, you may
become a target. It would be extremely helpful if there were to be an
arrangement in which the Government were able to share information
with the private sector and vice versa. I know, because I was involved in
it, that a few years ago the Government wanted to set up such an
exchange, but it didn’t go forward. In the six years since then, the need
for it has only increased.
Chloe Oakshett: Can I come in on the data point? One of the things
about collecting data is that obviously it increases the value of whoever is
collecting the data as a target. Quite often in these discussions there is a
lot of talk about information sharing, but the risk is not even because the
small operators or people who are going about their commercial business
do not have the same risk appetite and they are not in the same set-up
as, say, those in the defence industry or government agencies. It is
always worth considering the chilling factor of expecting people to hold
data that increases their vulnerability. For example, with innovation in
green technology or in areas where we might want to encourage nimble,
small players, to expect them to collect data that might make them the
target of a malicious nation state is quite a high ask.
Quite often I hear the scenarios, “We’re going to have a hotline here and
data reporting there”, and it sometimes does not reflect the reality at
sea. If you are a fisherman, you have a crew of 10, 13 people and you
see something nefarious at sea, you may not be in a situation where your
first thought is anything other than, “We need to leave this situation”. I
think it is really important to say that because the reporting angle is, of
course, important but you can’t ask people to make themselves
vulnerable disproportionate to their own commercial business. Some of
the output of discussion can assume that everybody is pulling in the
same direction with the same rate of backing and that is not the case.
Asking SMEs that are fishing businesses or small innovative technology
businesses to defend themselves against some of these threats is a really
high ask.
Q148 Chair: Thank you. We will move on. I have colleagues queuing up and
they will get the chance to follow up on some of the points we have
opened up very well in the first set of questions. A question from me
before I move to Graeme Downie is: how well understood is the
seriousness of threat, the level of resilience required for our energy
systems across Government? Graham, as you nodded, you can answer
that.
Graham Skinner: There is always a challenge about how much of the
intelligence can be passed from the intelligence communities to the
private sector. The arrangements that are in place with the NPSA are a
good start. I think they are useful. Designation of critical national
infrastructure would unlock those opportunities, but we will always
struggle as an industry to absolutely understand what the intent might be
of these state actors in this space. We will also struggle with the risk
velocity: how quickly might these threats face us? Unless we are working
closely with Government to do the risk assessments to determine what
the levels of resilience are to be implemented, we are not going to—
Q149 Chair: On joint working between industry and Government, Chloe, how
well do you think government across different Departments understand
what is needed for resilience in these systems?
Chloe Oakshett: Speaking from a maritime point of view, I understand
that a lot more is happening on maritime incidents. It has already been
mentioned that we need to move out of silos and look at this as part of
maritime resilience. Quite a lot of what is needed here is talking about
what vessels will service any disruption and who are the people involved
who will service this.
One of the things I would like to bring to the Committee is the length of
time that it takes to get somebody a security code to do particular types
of work, and it can hold up projects. There are lots of skilled workers who
might be available to do a job. A job might become sensitive that would
not normally be sensitive and the person who is ready to do it is not
necessarily security cleared. This goes through various maritime chains,
and we would want to look quite deeply into who are the people at ports,
who are the people who are able to work the equipment, who are the
vessel crews who are cleared to do work that suddenly becomes
vulnerable or classified. That might be a chokepoint in our energy
resilience, but it also is a chokepoint in our general maritime resilience.
That is something that we could address on both fronts.
Chair: Thank you. Practical recommendations are always very welcome
at this Committee.
Elisabeth Braw: I have a practical recommendation, which is that there
just are not enough repair crews and specifically there are not enough
crew members skilled in the repair of undersea cables. We can talk about
repair vessels and preparedness, but at the end of the day these are the
men—and it is typically men, but it could be women as well—who will
make that happen and it takes a very long time to train them. I think
there is an opportunity here for the UK to essentially set up a reserve
force of people who are trained in cable repairs, not to the highest level
because that takes a long time, but who could assist the master. The
Government could oversee that and it would function as a reserve in the
way that military reserves work.
Q150 Chair: To the question about different Government Departments, are
there Government Departments that are not in a good place in
understanding what is needed?
Elisabeth Braw: They understand what is needed but the fundamental
issue is that the UK is very good at detection, it has understood the
threats, but when it comes to adversarial activity, if it is outside territorial
waters, you can monitor, detect and identify, but what are you going to
do if you see adversarial activity happening?
Chair: We understand the risks but it is whether we are equipped to deal
with them.
Elisabeth Braw: The fundamental issue is: will the UK risk military
escalation with another country because it has spotted, let’s say, Russian
vessels in the act of interfering with cables in the exclusive economic
zone?
Graham Skinner: I think we underestimate the value in deterrence,
which should be our first port of call. If we harden our protection,
physical or cyber-security protection, that will be very important and
make us a much tougher target, which will deter, but also I would like to
see the response in the way that we saw news articles coming out to
recognise that we knew the Russians were there. If we see incidents
offshore, I would like to see a visible military response. It may be that
the horse has bolted, but we need to be able to demonstrate our
capability in response and make sure that our adversaries, no matter
which state they are, are aware that we will act. A good example might
be the Russian shadow fleet, where the French have been boarding
vessels and we have made a statement that we intend to do it at some
point. I think we could be a little bit bolder in our deterrence.
Chair: That is really helpful. I will go to Graeme now. Everybody else will
have their chances. Please indicate if you are planning to ask questions.
Q151 Graeme Downie: Chloe, if I can go back to where we started at the very
beginning about the legal basis for action, I was in Romania recently and
it is building Neptun Deep in the Black sea gas installation. I was
speaking to their Minister for Foreign Affairs and Defence, who was
talking about how they have created a new legal framework that would
essentially allow them to take military action outside of the 12-mile zone.
Are you aware of that and in particular—and I will come to Graham on
this as well—around drone activity? That is their biggest threat in the
Black sea. Are you aware of that work, and what legislation or what work
could we do in the UK to extend or make clearer our military ability to
act? How would that serve as a deterrent as well? The Romanians see it
very much as part of deterrence—“We are passing this to show we can”.
Chloe Oakshett: There are some points about this, which is the legal
framework can work really well for either innocents or those people who
are not coming with malicious intent, because it tends to be reactive. If
we are in a situation where there are fishermen who may be skirting a bit
around things or people who don’t have their technology up to date and
they are a bit like, “Where is it? Am I 510 m away or am I 480? I don’t
know”, that is definitely where an enhanced legal framework can improve
the situation. We can do that in EEZ.
I think where we probably need to accept the limitations of civil
commercial law, which is what I practise in. It is very unlikely that the
fine level or the financial risk level will ever deter somebody from flying a
drone for nefarious purposes that relate to security and defence. It might
identify people as taking a higher risk, and I think that would be relevant.
If we say they are well covered by civil and commercial law—so now,
“What is this person doing in this area?”—that might well be highly useful
for security and detection, but as deterrence the civil commercial legal
framework is very limited in what it can do.
Any maritime claim is subject to limitation. I don’t want to go too far into
that, but essentially if you have a small boat, you have a small backing of
insurance, and going after little boats for big trouble is probably not
worth it. Increasing resilience by going after the insurers is probably not
that helpful. Does that answer your question? I am afraid I can’t answer
on drones because that is slightly outside what I do.
Q152 Graeme Downie: Okay, no problem. Graham, can I pick that up with
you? What is your understanding of what action can be taken if there is a
drone near an offshore installation? I have tried to get an answer to this
from DESNZ and the Ministry of Defence. No one will give me an answer
as to whether or not we have a legal right to attack a drone over an
offshore oil rig.
Graham Skinner: First, we don’t have any intention of attacking drones
over oil rigs.
Graeme Downie: No, I am more getting at what your expectation would
be.
Graham Skinner: There have been a very limited number of drone
sightings around offshore infrastructure. We don’t know whether that is
because sometimes they are very difficult to spot—grey sea, grey sky; a
grey drone 500 m away might be very difficult to spot. When we have
seen them, they have been deliberately conspicuous and they have kept
a safe distance. We have a good reporting framework that we have
developed alongside DESNZ, which has its own drone reporting guidance.
We are in a position where we are gathering data at the moment, and I
think that is a reasonable place to be.
However, it comes back to what happens next. What would the
reasonable escalation scenarios be? At our Granite Resolve exercise we
included the possibility that a drone landed on a deck and you would not
know what its purpose or intent was. In those scenarios, it begins to get
tricky quite quickly and certainly we are interested to explore what
options might be available. It is very clear that kinetic anti-drone
technology will be for the police and the military. It is not going to be a
private option, so I think that is something that we just need to be aware
of.
Are drones the biggest threat for us at the moment? Perhaps because
they are exciting, they are unusual, they are flying in a war zone, lots of
people like to talk about them, but we need to make sure that our
foundational safety is there, our physical security and tackling cyberthreat and cyber-security needs to be at the utmost. Those are the attack
vectors where we are seeing hundreds of attacks across cyber-security
daily. I think our approach at the moment is proportionate. As I said, we
are interested to discuss further what we might do in an escalation
scenario.
Q153 Graeme Downie: How long has the reporting mechanism to DESNZ that
you talked about been in place and how effective is it? Is that who you
call in the event of a problem? Is it well understood by your members
that they are the people to call?
Graham Skinner: Yes. We issued that earlier this year, at the beginning
of March, so we have had that guidance quite recently, although all the
reporting requirements existed prior to that. We simply pulled them
together into a single document so that it was easy to access by the
managers who run the offshore installations. We have shared that with
colleagues in wind and later today I am meeting with the UK Chamber of
Shipping to talk about what guidance can be provided right across the
maritime sector.
The reporting is appropriate. It is into the right services, including JMSC,
so they have the situational awareness of what is going on, although we
don’t expect to get feedback on everything that happens because
ultimately some of that will be classified. There are mechanisms where
we can get some general information, which I think is important that we
have a look at. Getting feedback that reporting is recognised and acted
upon is important for further reporting to create a culture of vigilance.
One point comes back to what the response looks like, and could we see
a little bit more of it, because that will reassure the thousands of workers
who work offshore around the UK who are perhaps most exposed to
these sorts of risks.
Q154 Graeme Downie: To pick up on something you mentioned earlier about
Granite Resolve, there was a debate yesterday in Westminster Hall on the
idea of preparedness. What are the lessons out of Granite Resolve on
what preparedness looks like for you? Safety procedures, because of the
industry, have been practised over decades, but how do you transfer
some of that safety work that you have done into preparedness for
escalating threat?
Graham Skinner: We are very confident in our preparedness now, as
you say, based on our safety culture. However, preparedness for the
future requires us to first understand what the benchmark for resilience is
that is expected by Government. For example, do we have certain
performance standards and expectations for uptime and speed to
prepare, and what might we need to do, whether it is a national resource
for cable repair or piping repair? We are interested in having these
conversations and ultimately we will end up talking about who runs the
risk.
We know from Granite Resolve that our safety practice shows us if a
threat is unknown or escalating, we would shut down all platforms and
make them safe for the people who are on board. That obviously has a
financial implication for the companies that they are happy to address as
part of their safety practice, but the question might be: what if that
happened to 20 gas installations in the middle of winter, and what would
be the implications for the UK at that point? Those are the conversations
that we probably need to be having now.
Q155 Graeme Downie: Very briefly, Elisabeth, if I can bring you back to what
you were talking about on Taiwan, I have had some conversations about
subsea cables in Taiwan and a concern that some of the lessons in
Taiwan could not be shared with the UK directly for political reasons,
certainly mil to mil. Are there international forums where Taiwan is
currently not involved where it would be helpful for it to be involved so
that those lessons can be shared for subsea and other security
protections?
Elisabeth Braw: That is an excellent question. As you know, Taiwan is
excluded from all UN agencies, which is a massive disadvantage. It is not
allowed to join as a full member. If one were to approach it from the
industry side, Taiwan is just like any other jurisdiction. For example,
Chunghwa could share its practices.
I wanted to highlight one other country, which is Norway. It is extremely
good at practising for drone incidents around their offshore installations.
It has many and it has successfully looked after them for decades while
being exposed to significant Russian activity, including activity linked to
Russian fishing vessels that have a perfectly legitimate right to be in
Norwegian waters as in the treaty that governs all of that. If the
Committee wanted to make a study visit to Norway, I think that could be
very instructive because it has worked hard on the issues involving
drones and other adversarial activity or suspicious activity in their
offshore installations.
Q156 Claire Young: We have already had a fairly lengthy discussion about the
vulnerability of UK’s subsea cables and interconnectors. I want to focus
on a couple of things. The European Subsea Cables Association gave
evidence to the Joint Committee on the National Security Strategy and
alongside some fairly positive comments, they said, “However, gaps
remain, particularly in power cable repair processes, which require
further policy or other support”. Elisabeth, you have already talked about
the workforce issues, and Graham mentioned it as well, but those
comments suggest that there are other policy-related matters that also
need addressing. Could you comment on that?
Elisabeth Braw: Yes; in fact, I remember the comment because I was
part of that session too. The issue with interconnector repairs is that
there is not the sort of ambulance service in place for interconnectors
that there is for undersea cables. “Ambulance service” is my term; I just
think it works. For data cables there is essentially a subscription
arrangement where you pay for the repair service and you get to avail
yourself of it when your cable needs assistance, but the same thing is not
true for interconnectors and they take much longer to repair and are
much more expensive to repair. The question is how can such a service
be established because if it is going to be the case that interconnectors
will need more repairs for whatever reason, the industry has not found a
way of establishing an ambulance service so far. I think that the
Government could perhaps play a convening role or the role of generating
a framework under which it could be done.
Incidentally, that would also help to establish better insurance protection
for interconnectors. At the moment, it is very difficult to insure
interconnectors, which has to do with the fact that they are incredibly
expensive to repair, so it is not particularly attractive to insure them. If
you think of that from the perspective of operators, it must be absolutely
frightening to be an interconnector operator when you know that it will be
difficult to get insurance, and at the same time you face the real risk of
something happening to your interconnector. Then you would think
several times about whether it is commercially viable to operate that
interconnector, but with an ambulance service in place, that would take
some of the sting out of that dilemma or that conundrum. I think that is
where the Government could play a convening function.
Chloe Oakshett: May I add to that? I don’t know if it would help to say
that most of the operators do have contracts in place for these repairs.
They will have a framework in place with a repair operator and they will
call down services as they need them. That will have been negotiated and
all the commercials will have been negotiated at the same time. With an
ambulance service or without, it is likely to be the same people running
those services. Even if we put an ambulance service in place as an
overarching one, it is likely to be the same people, so the worry
becomes: what if there is a volume situation or what if there are two
situations? It is the same operators, because we are constrained by the
number of operators and that could take some time to resolve. It may be
that there is incident A and incident B and the call down would be for the
same repair company or the same crew, the same spread, perhaps the
same vessels, and they would be needed in two places.
It is possible that an ambulance service would be able to sort priority for
the Government rather than being subject to commercial whims, but
having said that, it would be quite difficult to negotiate that ambulance
service because all of this is commercial information, it is sensitive and
there are competing operators. We would not want to create a situation
that significantly impacted the commercial operators that are acting
there.
Elisabeth Braw: If I can add, with the ambulance service it is first come,
first served, unless you have a very significant reason why your cable
should go ahead of another company’s cable, whereas if you don’t have
an ambulance service, it really is a free-for-all and you have to fight to
find a repair vessel, which is exactly what happened to Fingrid in Finland.
When EstLink 2 was struck on Christmas day, they had to call around to
find a repair vessel. It took them a long time and they could not find a
repair vessel. In the end, they had to improvise and set up something
themselves. It took a long time and it was expensive. An ambulance
service would not solve every issue, but it would at least create some
sort of process and stability to make that a little bit easier for the
operators.
Q157 Claire Young: Chloe, would you say that part of the further policy would
need to be about some kind of prioritisation?
Chloe Oakshett: In a situation of multiple outages, yes, that might be
something that could be useful. Again, it is the same operators, and if
you are in that situation, under the Civil Contingencies Act, you could
instruct a UK-based operator as to where to go when. Perhaps the most
useful thing as part of this would be to have a good audit of who is
available, what vessels are available and what the spread is, so that we
know what would be deployable in that situation, regardless of the
contractual framework. Even if the contractual framework is with the
Government, or perhaps they are intergovernmental agreements, they
are still the same operators, and if they are working on something in one
place, they are not available to work on it in another.
Chair: We need to move on.
Q158 Lizzi Collinge: We have already talked about threat reporting pathways.
I want to dig into that a little bit more. Graham, you said before that you
have pulled together into one document all the different reporting
pathways. Are you confident that the energy industry is fully aware of
those threat reporting pathways and is able to use them properly?
Graham Skinner: Yes, I am very confident. It has been well
communicated with our members, who will adopt it into their emergency
response planning. They will make sure that their teams are well briefed
on that. One of the complications around reporting is how many different
Government Departments and stakeholders are all interested in finding
out what is going on. Certainly, that is a bit of a challenge. It is not just
the initial report, but then there is quite a bit of follow-up required. It is
an administrative task.
Q159 Lizzi Collinge: I am very aware, Chair, that we are focusing on the
maritime today for understandable reasons. I think it might be worth the
Committee’s time to try to get evidence on this from the wider energy
industry. Chloe, do you have any comments on that?
Chloe Oakshett: I can provide you with some anecdotes from small to
medium enterprises. There are lots of people saying, “Come and tell us”.
I have been to security conferences where NATO will say, “We are setting
up a hotline”, and somebody else will say, “We are setting up a hotline”,
and the fishing industry will be setting up a hotline. There is an enormous
number of hotlines, but it is not necessarily proportionate to the number
of people who want to call them. There can be a bit of a worry about
calling them in the first place. That is what I will add to that.
Another thing about reporting comes back to the data point. Addleshaw
Goddard was working with a subsea cable owner, and as part of the
technical qualities of the cable, it records sonar properties that tell it
about damage and repair requirements of the cable. As it happened,
recording that sonar data could also tell it about submarine activity in the
area above the cable. This was not information that the cable operator
particularly wanted to record; they just happened to record it because it
was part of the repair process. Then there was a negotiation about how
they were going to hold this data, and eventually it was concluded that
the data was to be held for something like 24, 36 hours after recording it.
It was an ongoing process. That is a high point of sensitivity, that just
reporting things can make things tricky for the operator.
Q160 Lizzi Collinge: Thank you for that. The Government have said that they
are going to develop a reporting portal. I think it was specifically for
drones but I would have to check that. Do you think that is just adding
another layer, or do you think that is a helpful collation of the reporting
structures?
Graham Skinner: A portal would be helpful. I think that intention has
been around for some time, but the reality is a little bit more complicated
because reporting into a portal is just half the battle. What we also need
to know is who is receiving the reporting, how often it is monitored and
what happens after that, so there is a complex element to that. We would
welcome that for simplicity down the line and for a single point of
contact.
Q161 Lizzi Collinge: Thank you. Obviously there are different levels of threat.
There are safety issues that the industry is used to dealing with, as you
said before. Things can move from a safety issue to a security issue and
then potentially from a security issue to a defence issue. Who decides
what level of threat or threshold an individual attack, attempt or
surveillance meets? Is there guidance for that?
Graham Skinner: My understanding is that any report of suspicious
activity or incidents that has a security dimension would go into the JMSC
and they would then take the lead on all that decision making. From our
operators’ perspective, we would assume that any decisions on escalation
into some sort of defence response would not be particularly quick
because these are significant, weighty decisions that need to be made by
Government. We would continue to use our emergency response
capability in the short term to make sure that we are keeping people safe
and minimising the environmental impact of anything.
Chloe Oakshett: On cable damage, anything at sea is extremely difficult
to collect evidence about, as I am sure the Committee knows. It is
possible to work out who was where and what kind of damage you are
dealing with. What is not possible to work out is intent. I suggest that the
intent angle will have to come from outside the commercial maritime
information space. It will not be something we have held unless we have
been warned in advance that this vessel is in the area or we think
something could happen in this particular space. Otherwise, it is
completely outside the commercial space and most damage is accidental
and non-nefarious.
Q162 Lizzi Collinge: The next question is for Elisabeth and Chloe. I want to
think about co-ordination if there were an event that needed a response
from the Government or from military. We have other energy
infrastructure that has long been seen as a security threat. Nuclear is the
key example there, where there is a well-rehearsed response ready that
is practised. Do you think the same is true for maritime installations? Do
you think that if something happened, the coastguard, the Navy and
energy operators would be ready to spring into action? I will come to
Elisabeth first.
Elisabeth Braw: They would. If we look at other countries, for example
around the Baltic sea, which is where the most activity has taken place so
far, you have the Baltic Sentry, which is a NATO initiative. It essentially
has the task of patrolling undersea installations. It is not 100%
comprehensive because there are more undersea installations than there
are vessels that are available to Baltic Sentry, but it is something that
was not in place a few years ago.
In the UK, the question that always becomes the crucial point is who
should respond. In Estonia, Finland, Sweden, Poland and Germany, it is
the coastguard response, and the coastguard is responsible for
constabulary matters along the coast. In the UK, the coastguard is a little
bit different, with a focus on search and rescue, and the responsibility of
constabulary duties has essentially been left to the Navy. For boarding
shadow vessels, the announcement was that special forces would do it,
but that is very different from the coastguard intervening when there is
what looks like a suspicious criminal activity. I am not saying that the
Committee should ask the Government to create a proper coastguard,
but there is a gap there in the UK. It is a criminal matter, destruction or
tampering with infrastructure, and sometimes it can be geopolitically
motivated.
Q163 Ms Polly Billington: I am going to ask a little bit about cyber-security.
Once you are moving to a more diffuse and renewable energy system,
you have different kinds of risks. Do you think the energy sector cybersecurity strategy adequately mitigates these risks, as you understand
them?
Graham Skinner: We welcome the publication of the strategy last week.
It is very helpful that there are some clear timescales and commitments
for action. It is a matter of time to see if that drives significant change. I
think we are as confident as you can be in the cyber-security space that
our energy installations are following the correct regulations and are
preparing to adapt to the new forthcoming regulations, and that we have
strong levels of cyber-protection. I think that continues to be one of our
biggest risks going forward.
Q164 Ms Polly Billington: The way the energy system works actually creates
new risks, doesn’t it?
Graham Skinner: Absolutely. In the OT cyber-security space—I think
our colleagues at Ofgem will speak better to that after this session—a
very different response is required across industry. Equally, a lot of our
emergency response capability sits within the IT space, so we need to
manage both of those quite carefully. We are beginning to take a total
security view. Equally, as your system security increases, your
vulnerability to insider threat, for example, then increases, so you shift
the risk. Therefore, physical security is important. We need to keep
moving everything forward and managing the continuous improvement
cycle.
Q165 Ms Polly Billington: I am interested in the contrast between what
Elisabeth said about the mix of energy resources increasing resilience and
how changing the structure of our energy system to become more diffuse
has significant resilience implications, and the new cyber-security
regulatory requirements we therefore need to establish as a result.
Graham Skinner: I accept that there are benefits and risks from having
a distributed energy system, such as we have. Ultimately, I think the
more variety there is in the energy system, the more unlikely it is that we
will have a single cyber-attack that could fundamentally take out our
infrastructure.
Q166 Ms Polly Billington: Talking about one single one, what lessons do you
think the UK could learn from the recent cyber-attack on Poland’s energy
grid?
Graham Skinner: I think everyone working in the cyber-security space
is working very hard to learn as much as possible from that.
Q167 Ms Polly Billington: What do you think are the top takes?
Graham Skinner: The top takes are: do the basics. The basics are very
important. That means you have to follow all good practice to make sure
you protect your systems. You have to update them regularly. You have
to close the open doors that are within the system. You have to look very
carefully at the cyber-security practice of the supply chain as well, to
make sure that that is not introducing any new entry points.
Q168 Ms Polly Billington: Can you explain more about the supply chain risks?
Graham Skinner: Supply chain risk is probably better spoken to by my
Ofgem colleagues later on. I hope they do not mind me passing that one
over.
Q169 Ms Polly Billington: No, that is fine. Is there evidence that offshore
wind turbines are particularly at risk from cyber-attack? What should be
done to increase their cyber-resilience?
Graham Skinner: I do not believe that there is any specific difference
between where they are located as to the cyber-risk that they would face.
Q170 Ms Polly Billington: Notwithstanding all the things that we have been
talking about with the physical risks of it being offshore, does that
increase or affect the cyber-resilience?
Graham Skinner: I do not believe so.
Ms Polly Billington: That is helpful. Thank you.
Q171 Torcuil Crichton: Thank you all for coming in. Fascinating stuff. Time is
short, so I will keep my questions short. Somebody has to pay for all this
and Graham raised the question of who owns the risk and Elisabeth
talked about the high cost of insuring all this. Chloe, perhaps it is best to
ask you: where is the boundary between the private sector paying the
insurance and the state stepping in and paying for the security?
Chloe Oakshett: Yes, I think we come back here to the limitation of the
liability of vessels. If you have small tonnage, you are restricted in the
amount that you will be paying out. If we are talking about a small
fishing vessel doing large damage, it is almost meaningless. With the
current set-up, the way that marine insurance works, if a significant-sized
vessel does significant damage, we might be in the ballpark of, “Yes, this
is something worth pursuing”. Realistically, when we are talking about an
anchor drag from a fishing vessel, the harm caused is potentially
disproportionate to the vessel size and the ability to recover. Civil
recovery is perhaps not the best route here. I think that getting the
insurance companies to pay is low.
Q172 Torcuil Crichton: Elisabeth, you talked about an ambulance service and
recovery. Should there be a better regulatory framework to make sure
that we can step in to recover connections and to recover infrastructure
when incidents like this happen?
Elisabeth Braw: I am not sure that the Government need to step in
quite as much, but there needs to be more communication around the
fact that this is a crucial profession. Nobody who has not experienced the
cable cuts has paid any attention to the profession of cable repair crews,
yet they are indispensable when there is a fault to cables. The industry
has trouble recruiting simply because not enough people know that it
exists. If there were to be more public communication around the fact
that this is one of the most crucial professions in the UK, we would at
least have more people going into the profession. Then we could start
talking about the Government perhaps owning a repair vessel or two, but
it will be futile without experienced people serving on those vessels. I
think a convening function would be useful. I do not think a regulatory
function will be necessary.
Q173 Torcuil Crichton: I will come to the convening function, but should we
see the spending in this sector as defence spending?
Elisabeth Braw: It would certainly fit within the 1.5% of GDP, and it
was an ingenious move by Mark Rutte when he got the member states to
agree on the 1.5%, because it is very loosely defined as infrastructure
that relates to national security. It could fit within that 1.5%.
Q174 Torcuil Crichton: We are running out of time. Graham, I want to go
back to drones, because we are all excited by drones, as you know. You
said that there were a limited number of incidents in the North sea. There
seem to be more in Norway. Can you put a number on the drone
incidents, and I think you have said this before, drone incidents versus
cyber-security attacks? What is the proportionate risk there?
Graham Skinner: There have been fewer than a handful of drone
incidents in the last couple of years in the UK. Although there have been
more in Norway, there is still a very small number, whereas our critical
infrastructure is subject to hundreds of cyber-attacks daily. There is a
fundamental disproportion of cyber-threat to drone threat.
Q175 Torcuil Crichton: I have one quick last question, picking up on what
Polly said about offshore wind infrastructure and its vulnerability to
cyber-attack, but also this fear that there could be things built into these
turbines that help to monitor our activity at sea. Have you seen evidence
of that?
Graham Skinner: I cannot specifically comment on that. What I will say
more generally is that decisions such as components within the supply
chain, countries of origin, and so on is definitely something on which we
would expect Government to define whose components we could use and
incorporate.
Q176 Torcuil Crichton: Such as the Ming Yang decision?
Graham Skinner: That is correct, but the reasoning and the motivation
behind that has been held on to by Government. I think that is probably
appropriate. It would be very difficult for industry to reach those
conclusions ourselves.
Torcuil Crichton: Thank you all.
Chair: Thank you very much indeed. That concludes our our first panel.
Thank you all for your evidence. We will take a short recess while we
change panels.