Energy Security and Net Zero
Committee
Oral evidence: Energy resilience, HC 171
Wednesday 3 June 2026
Ordered by the House of Commons to be published on 3 June 2026.
Watch the meeting
Members present: Bill Esterson (Chair); Ms Polly Billington; Sir Christopher
Chope; Lizzi Collinge; Torcuil Crichton; Graeme Downie; Bradley Thomas; Claire
Young.
Questions 137 - 206
Witnesses
I: Chloe Oakshett, Maritime Lawyer, Addleshaw Goddard LLP and Director,
Scottish Maritime Cluster; Elisabeth Braw, Senior Fellow, Atlantic Council; and
Graham Skinner, Health, Safety & Security Policy Manager, Offshore Energies UK
(OEUK).
II: Deborah Petterson, Director of Resilience and Energy Management, NESO;
and Stuart Okin, Director for Cyber Regulation and Emerging Technologies,
Ofgem.
Examination of witnesses
Witnesses: Deborah Petterson and Stuart Okin.
Q177 Chair: Welcome back to the Energy Security and Net Zero Select
Committee and this morning’s session in our inquiry into energy
resilience. Could our second panel introduce themselves, please?
Stuart Okin: My name is Stuart Okin. I am the Director for Cyber
Regulation and Emerging Technologies, which include quantum and
artificial intelligence, at Ofgem.
Deborah Petterson: I am Dr Deborah Petterson. I am the Director for
Whole Energy System Resilience at NESO, the National Energy System
Operator. You will be familiar with NESO’s role in running the electricity
system of today and planning the system of the future, but you might be
less aware of our new duty to provide independent advice and guidance
to Government on any risk that might impact any part of the energy
system.
Q178 Lizzi Collinge: We heard evidence in the first panel about the threat to
our energy infrastructure and we have seen stark examples, for example
in Ukraine, of what can happen when an energy infrastructure is
targeted. With that in mind, do you think we should be moving to more of
an emergency mindset with Government and agencies around increasing
energy resilience? Should we be acting with greater urgency than we
already are? I will come to Deborah first.
Deborah Petterson: Thank you very much for your question. Obviously,
geopolitics, and the increasing threat we see with geopolitics, is in the
forefront of all our minds. I find that the energy industry is extremely
well-exercised, partly because the eventual impact is an outage and,
therefore, storms, cyber-attacks, all the things you have been discussing
in your first section this morning, are issues that the industry is well
versed in. We have regular exercising programmes. However, the
Strategic Defence Review and the resilience action plan produced by
Cabinet Office all have this focus on building home defence, and that
conversation about, “Is there more to do?” What I can say at the moment
is that the way NESO is designing the system, the cyber-security
requirements and industry’s approach to that absolutely meets the
current risk appetite set out by Ministers and regulated by Ofgem.
Stuart Okin: I have been in this role for seven years, and we have a
well-established cyber-resilience network for gas and electricity. That
being said, we have seen over the last two or three years an acceleration
that has been conducted by our operators of essential services, which
essentially is critical national infrastructure. It is something that we live
with every day, as Deb has just said. We have to lean in to constantly
manage the risks and the changing and evolving risk landscape.
Q179 Lizzi Collinge: Do you get what you need to be able to meet that
changing, emerging and increasing risk?
Stuart Okin: Are you talking about our resources?
Lizzi Collinge: Resources and responses from Government when those
are needed with intelligence and information.
Stuart Okin: We have a very good working relationship with all the
Departments. We understand our swim lanes and what we do, and we
support each other in these areas. This is why you saw the strategy that
was released last week, which was a quad strategy by ourselves, DESNZ,
NESO and NCSE. We have working lines. Would it be useful for the
Committee and for the public to hear about how the set-up is arranged?
Lizzi Collinge: Yes, briefly.
Stuart Okin: Very briefly then, essentially, under the Network and
Information Systems Regulations 2018—that is the standard Act that we
support—there are some very clear lines. Regulations 10(1) and 10(2)
mean that there have to be appropriate and proportionate controls and
measures in place to manage the risk; 10(3) looks at the state of the art;
and 10(4) is being responsive to the competent authorities. We are a
joint competent authority with DESNZ. DESNZ does the designation. The
OESs, the operators of essential services, should designate themselves or
say that they are an OES, but the designation itself is conducted by
DESNZ. That is then handed over to us to operate.
We do that in conjunction with NCSE and CCU, as part of GCHQ, which is
the technical authority, and they have the cyber-assessment framework.
DESNZ will set the risk appetite, the type of attackers that it is looking to
prevent, their capability. It sets the risk appetite, and then we assure
against that. We inspect—we have done 40 deep-level inspections, which
have led to fines of £30 million over the last few years. We ask them to
do self-assessments and we engage directly with the industry. Of course,
they have to exercise an audit as well.
Q180 Lizzi Collinge: Thank you very much. I want to move on to threats that
are not geopolitically related. When we think about ageing critical
infrastructure—we have had the example of the North Hyde substation
fire—what standards are being set for the maintenance and inspection of
ageing infrastructure?
Stuart Okin: We are currently investigating. That is a current ongoing
investigation with North Hyde. On the recommendations of NESO, we
went and looked at National Grid specifically and looked to see whether
there are any other areas where they might have assets under similar
condition as well. We looked through that. We are looking to see what we
can do with standards that can be utilised for the future. I cannot talk
about the ongoing investigation.
Lizzi Collinge: That is fair enough.
Deborah Petterson: I will add that North Hyde, the substation that led
to the eventual closure of Heathrow, was the first Secretary of Stateinstructed review for NESO to do. Although NESO sits outside regulation,
we have this power to request information for any near miss or for any
incident that happens. Referring to your first session too, I think it is a
nice example of how in those initial stages you do not understand what
has happened. It was exactly the playbook we expected for hostile state
sabotage. In that moment, what you saw was NESO mobilised, DESNZ,
National Grid, SSC, but also counter-terror and policing, the intelligence
agents, all come together into this well-rehearsed—the London Fire
Brigade particularly.
North Hyde is not critical national infrastructure—it is a substation in the
west of London—but it led to an outage that included traffic lights,
underground, rail, data centres, hospitals and GP surgeries. Fortunately,
it was in the middle of the night, so that was all resolved very quickly. In
our recommendations, we made a whole set about the cross-cutting
nature of critical national infrastructure, and that is being picked up by
DESNZ. They accepted every single one of our recommendations to look
at the cross-cutting, underpinning nature of the energy system. Also,
interestingly in that report, those recommendations have been picked up
by the aviation sector, the rail sector and the energy sector. I think
having someone who is a step away from Government but without that
regulatory lens, to build a more secure system, is already proving to have
value.
Q181 Lizzi Collinge: That is very helpful, because you have gone immediately
into something I wanted to ask about, the interdependency. As you said,
North Hyde itself was not critical national infrastructure, but the impact it
could have—and the impact any energy outage could have on things like
transport and healthcare—is clearly very important and could lead to a
risk to life. Are there any further comments you would like to make on
how you map those dependencies and how you manage the second-order
effects?
Deborah Petterson: Yes, you are right, energy underpins our way of
life, and I have started to describe energy security as our national
security. You cannot launch a defence of your country without energy.
That understanding, as it becomes more interdependent, along with
telecoms—there is an interesting interconnection there. There are various
parts to this. First, DESNZ asked us to look at the methodology for
defining critical national infrastructure. You can imagine that we used to
have these big blocks of power stations, and now we have this logically
interconnected network of digital, telco, energy all coming together to
operate the system. We are doing that, and then we will apply that
methodology.
But as you rightly stated, something classified as critical national
infrastructure in energy—there are lots of things that are not critical
national infrastructure that underpin other critical infrastructure and
therefore the mapping of that system. I have to admit being a bit partial
to this. When I was at the National Cyber Security Centre, the knowledge
base was created by my team there and that has now been handed to the
Cabinet Office, which obviously has a cross-cutting view of Government. I
understand that its situation centre is picking that up to look at how
these are interlinked.
On the resilience action plan, the Cabinet Office said that it will move
very quickly to looking at how all the different sectors critical
infrastructure map together, but we are looking at that at NESO too. If
we have that map of the infrastructure, it allows us to support the
questions about where we best protect to support our national resilience.
Q182 Lizzi Collinge: Thank you. I want to move on to a different threat but
one that is extremely important, and that is more frequent extreme
weather events. Do you think we have the correct strategy and
operations in place to mitigate that threat to our energy system?
Stuart Okin: We have just set up a resilience hub within Ofgem. Inside
the resilience hub we are looking at all the cross-cutting—cyber; weather;
we are looking across all these different areas. I think that as we diversify
and as we have more or different types of energy systems in place,
including the flexibility of localised, that will likely be able to give us more
resilience. It does increase the attack surface from a cyber perspective,
that is true, and there is also pressure on the supply chain, but on the
other hand, if it is designed correctly, it will give us the diversity that we
need for resilience.
Deborah Petterson: If I could build on that, NESO is there to provide
independent assessment advice on any risk to the energy system, and
that also includes climate resilience. In our first year we have brought in
a professor from the Met Office, Professor Emily Wallace, to support
NESO in understanding. Weather is our fuel, but it is also a risk and
inherently variable. We take the security of supply of weather as
seriously as we do gas and electricity, and making sure we can hone that
data.
We model 30,000 weather patterns every single day to work out the
parameters for what energy we require: when it is on a cold, grey day
that we have sufficient gas and other sources of electricity; how we
manage the system when there is excessive sunshine or wind. The more
accurate data we have, the more economic and efficient the system can
be. We are working with the Met Office, who are fantastic at using AI and
their machine learning, but what they do, because at the moment we
look at historic weather patterns 34 years back, and we use that to model
these 30,000—
Lizzi Collinge: Is there a risk there because our weather is changing?
Deborah Petterson: Yes. The Met Office is bringing to us the forward
projection of the weather we have yet to see but they have relative
certainty in looking 10 and 20 years ahead for infrastructure. Emily has
been pulling through that expertise into our strategic energy planning so
we can look at regions and understand where there will be sea level rise.
The other area we are doing at NESO is creating international
partnerships. Our colleagues in America and Australia are well versed at
dealing with wildfire. We saw a 600% increase in wildfire in this country
over the last two years. We do emergency preparedness exercises, so we
are there for the whole sector. We report to Ofgem and Government
every year on the season ahead and how the industry is prepared. We
are exercising emergency preparedness for the summers of the future
and for now.
Q183 Lizzi Collinge: Stuart, you touched on supply chain and things to that.
Should the UK be prioritising the domestic manufacture of components,
which could affect the cost of them, to reduce the risks of supply chain
dependency and the dependency of our energy system on foreign supply
chains?
Stuart Okin: First, that is a decision for Government, clearly. That is
DESNZ’s decision, and—
Lizzi Collinge: Do you have an opinion on it?
Stuart Okin: There are two parts to this. First, there is a risk and then
there is a growth. On the risk side of things, we should always take a
threat view that is based on intelligence—and that is intelligence not just
about the country but also about the company, the individuals—and that
threat intelligence should give you an idea or a view of what we should
do in any particular component or system area. That is the first part of it.
Then there is a growth part, which is that if something is being developed
from a domestic perspective, obviously we need to be very careful of the
value for money and the cost, as I know this Committee is very focused
on as well. There is the balancing between the cost of building something
locally versus the risk.
Deborah Petterson: NESO is one of the areas—so where we provide
independent and expert advice, often it is driven by the sector that has a
particular interest in supply chain. Also, interestingly, in April we had our
first international security roundtable where we brought the Five Eyes
over, along with some of our European counterparts, to bring together
our security concerns. One of those areas was supply chain and how you
secure the supply chain.
Our view is that we should have a diverse supply chain. We would not
want a monoculture of one type, but also I think from my previous
experience in cyber-security that it is about always looking at your
vulnerability. If it is what I would call a dumb piece of kit, a piece of
metal, I would advise someone to have a diverse supply chain so you
have options but the threat is less, whereas if it is something that is
enriched with data: where do you want your data, who has access to it,
who holds it, are you comfortable if it is in another country, what you
would do out of hours, maybe that is a huge benefit? By asking those
questions and then taking that judgment, we support industry in
providing advice and guidance.
Q184 Lizzi Collinge: Finally, we had some interesting evidence in the last
session about the risks of putting too many burdens on operators,
especially smaller operators and smaller businesses, around their
responsibilities for energy resilience. Do you think there needs to be a
dissemination of responsibility for energy resilience to wider society and
to operators and businesses, rather than it just being held in central
Government? What are your thoughts on that?
Stuart Okin: We have a number of different Departments, as I pointed
out at the beginning. DSIT is doing a huge amount of work in setting the
new Cyber Security and Resilience Bill and the setting up of the security
unit inside there. We have DESNZ, ourselves and NESO, so there are
quite a few, and of course NCSC.
If I understand the question where you are aiming for, for the larger
operators of central services that are critical national infrastructure, I
think the focus needs to be on them making sure they step up. We
should hold them to account to make sure that they do that. The cyberassessment framework that they utilise covers everything from risk
governance right through. It is an outcome-based system, but it is very
thorough.
We have added to that—we have 300 pages of added guidance to that—
which includes some of the physical elements as well. All outcome-based,
not prescriptive, it gives them the idea of what we are expecting to do
but I would expect them to set up.
Smaller entities and licensees, the 1,400 licensees that are not the CNI,
are a different area. We have gone to consultation recently saying for the
CNI base should we change the thresholds, but for all of the others, the
1,400 licences, “This is a baseline standard. How do you feel about
that?”, which is basically around Cyber Essentials and Cyber Essentials
Plus. We have asked the industry to come back on that. However, it
should be pointed out to the Committee that that is really a baseline.
They do not look at governance and risk. They look at five different
areas.
Q185 Ms Polly Billington: I would like to ask a little bit about the energy
sector cyber-security strategy, particularly the changing nature of our
energy system. We are now changing the risk profile quite considerably
because of the nature of the more complex and decentralised grid, much
of which we have talked about. What I noted in what is said in the
strategy is that, “The integration of legacy infrastructure with new
technologies presents a complex challenge requiring careful management
to ensure seamless and secure operations”. How does the framework put
forward in the strategy interact with the Cyber Security and Resilience Bill
and Ofgem and DESNZ’s consultation reshaping cyber regulation in
downstream gas and electricity?
Stuart Okin: It covers a number of different areas but I will just pick
one, for example, to give to the Committee. Supply chain is a key part of
that. Inside the action plan that we have in the energy strategy, we will
be looking at supply chain standards and supply chain guidance. In fact,
we released yesterday some principles that we would like the supply
chain to look at. How that relates to the Cyber Security and Resilience Bill
is that the Bill at the moment is intended to have supply chain as a
regulated entity.
Ms Polly Billington: Much like your answers to Lizzi.
Stuart Okin: Exactly. We started developing this over a year ago. We
had sight of the Cyber Security and Resilience Bill, so we needed to make
sure the strategy aligned with that. That is just one example.
Deborah Petterson: You are absolutely right. There is an increased
attack surface, a much richer set of assets. However, one of the learnings
from the conflict in Ukraine is to move to a far more distributed system to
give you a greater resilience and a more diverse supply of different
energy resources, a greater basket to operate from.
Lizzi mentioned the Polish cyber-attacks. What we need to bear in mind is
that the adversary was already targeting these. There is a question mark:
what was their motivation? Was it to distract people from distributed
energy resources because they have an interest in oil and gas sales or
was it just to start testing and trying their capability in that space?
I think what is important are the smaller operators. There are things like
Cyber Essentials, there is a free offer from the NCSC. We are very lucky
to have an outward-facing intelligence agency there to support. I cannot
believe I am going to quote Spider-Man but with great power comes
great responsibility. If these industries wish to be part of our energy mix,
the national security implications of the role they provide has to be taken
seriously. NEOS has this whole-system view now and we are building new
relationships with wind and batteries and solar, and bringing them into
this community to better understand the threat.
Q186 Ms Polly Billington: That is helpful. It is interesting you mentioned
Spider-Man, when you were talking about what happened at Hyde. I
think of how this can sound extremely dull until suddenly you are in a “28
Days Later” scenario and so forth. We need to understand what the risks
are when you have something that is more distributed and what that
means. On your point about interconnecting very strongly with telecoms,
we have two separate regulatory bodies for telecoms and energy and yet
those two are increasingly interconnected in regulation. Do you see one
of the roles of NESO is to co-ordinate those two aspects and is that in
your mandate? Is that formally there or has that grown up as you have
been established?
Deborah Petterson: Our duty is to provide the Government and
industry with independent assessment advice on any risk of the energy
system. Some people question that that sounds unbounded. For me, the
energy system is dependent on digital and telco, therefore it is helpfully
unbounded because it allows that if it can provide a risk that needs
investigation, NESO has the reach to do that. For example, one of our
learnings from the Iberian peninsula outage—of which there are many
because of the lived experience of our partners, some of the best learning
you will ever have—is in the restoration process, the fragility of the
telecoms.
We are absolutely now moving to exercise with our partners and the
focus of our emergency preparedness assessment, which we do in
consultation with Ofgem and DESNZ about the areas of focus. We will be
looking at operational telephony and how that works under crisis and
stress.
Stuart Okin: That exercise is being conducted at the end of this month.
Q187 Claire Young: Sticking with the issue of the security strategy, what
specific metrics will determine whether it has been successful in
increasing cyber-security resilience in the energy sector, particularly
given increasing distribution and changing threats? The absence for a
period of any successful cyber-attacks does not necessarily mean you
have a comprehensively resilient sector.
Deborah Petterson: I will pass to Stuart in just one moment, but there
is a thing about working in risk that the absence of an incident, the crisis
that did not happen, is hard to judge and assign a value to. It has been
estimated that the outage in the Iberian Peninsula cost the economy in
one day €1.6 billion, I think it is. There is that very extreme example.
The Jaguar Land Rover and Marks & Spencer incidents have shown the
potential for loss to the UK economy, but for the actual metrics I will pass
to Stuart.
Stuart Okin: The key metrics for the strategy will be around exercising
and testing. You should not be looking at, as you have just said, incidents
in that respect. You should be looking at exercising and testing. There are
a number of different measurements even underneath that. With the
operators of essential services at the moment, the critical national
infrastructure, we have an assurance programme that we expect them to
be sending to us every year—their assurance plan, how they are
exercising, how they are testing—and we can pick up on particular areas.
We have made it very clear in the objectives, that it is not about having a
clear test result. In fact, we want you to go and find those problems, and
that is very clear in our documentation. When you find the problems, how
are you going to mitigate them? That is what we will hold you
accountable to on the timelines. That is done with either individual or
groups; the operators can group together and test that.
Then the systemic testing, which NESO will be conducting—we also do
exercising and testing for big gas outages—usually in October, also
includes electricity downward effect. Exercising, testing, constantly
looking for problems, gaps and fixing those gaps are the KPIs that we
measure the success on.
Q188 Claire Young: Given that we have new and emerging threats, such as
rapid advancements in AI weaponisation by threat actors, how will the
strategy be changed to counter those?
Stuart Okin: We have written, as a quota actually—we did this very
quickly after the Mythos on 7 April. We wrote quite quickly to the
operators to ask them to focus their attention on that particular area and
indeed Poland’s lessons as well.
The thing about AI, and it is really important, is that machine learning
has been around for some time, and AI is just an extension to this. It is
an incredible powerful thing and it will be absolutely necessary for us to
balance the system. When we were talking about the weather system,
there are some great AI solutions in cloud casting that I know NESO are
using, so this is incredibly important, but also it can be used to
weaponise. NCSC recently came out with a blog about the fact that we
now expect huge amounts of patching off the back of the Glasswing
programme, and there are other similar models.
How does it change? It means that certain things like island mode
become incredibly important. That is part of our inspections, to make
sure that operators can literally pull the plug if they need to be able to do
so. It is a requirement under our guidance and our overlays that they are
able to work with either no digital or partial digital; it is actually an area.
It will be tricky. We are expecting AI defence mechanisms to come as
well in place, but there are mitigations we can take today.
Deborah Petterson: Can I build on that as well? The Claude Mythos or
the ChatGPT 5.5 is already rolled out. I always like Jen Easterly’s view on
this—the ex-head of CISA in the US—that we do not so much have a
cyber-security problem as we have a software coding problem with bad
code. In some ways, rather than this being apocalyptic, it is also an
opportunity because it is good at finding bad code. We will have a wall of
patches to fix the bad code, like draining the swamp of all that enduring
and legacy code that was not well-written in the first place. We have this
sprint now, but it will leave us in a stronger place.
Q189 Claire Young: It has been suggested to us that it is not clear what types
of cyber-attacker the Government are now expecting OESs to protect the
energy networks from. Do you think that is a fair criticism?
Deborah Petterson: Do we care what cyber they are?
Stuart Okin: I am not sure it is a fair criticism. We have a very clear
definition that NCSC has led us towards, which is then signed off as a risk
appetite by DESNZ, which is the type of attacker—whether it is state or
non-state—that we are trying to protect against is professional in nature,
is able to use known vulnerabilities, and is able to stay undetected for
some time and laterally move around the systems. That is the definition.
Then against that definition, NCSC have basically looked at all the
different scenarios that they had seen in the past where people with that
definition have been able to attack and have then developed the risk
appetite. That is what we suggest that you have for controls and changes
in place to prevent that type of thing from occurring or that type of
attacker profile and their capability. That is what we work towards today.
Deborah Petterson: There are those that wish to do us harm and have
intent to do us harm—and that could be hybrid, cyber, physical—and it is
about our industry being prepared. What we have seen in the current
geopolitical context is that we cannot predict tomorrow but what we can
do is exercise and be prepared for a system that is agile and able to
respond; so that is the objective.
Stuart Okin: The last thing I would like to add on to this—and this is
probably more Deb’s area from her past—is that essentially we are part
of an ecosystem, so we must not forget our cyber-offensive capability
and our military defence capability. The operator’s essential services are
our last line of defence not the first line of defence.
Q190 Claire Young: You don’t think there is any difference between nation
state-level attacks versus compromised supply chains?
Deborah Petterson: I would anticipate a compromised supply chain
would probably be a nation state anyway because you need a huge
amount of resource behind you to do something in that space. I think on
what you mentioned earlier, and you are absolutely right about AI
bringing new threat, is that it almost democratises or allows the least
skilled to become skilled. Whereas maybe even 18 months ago, the
National Cyber Security Centre would have split your hacktivist from your
nation state attacker, you are giving the nation state attacker skillset and
capability to a less skilled individual. Hence my question that I am not
sure that the definition matters any more.
Our operators of central services, and certainly in the energy system, see
themselves as the frontline of defence. They are home defence, the Dad’s
Army of our day, who are there ready to defend and motivated to do so.
Q191 Claire Young: Stepping back from that, do you think there is sufficient
Government and regulatory oversight of the cyber-protection of
electricity transmission networks?
Deborah Petterson: I will allow Ofgem to defend themselves.
Stuart Okin: Again, in the last two to three years we have seen an
absolute acceleration of focus, and you have designated a good
Permanent Secretary as well.
Q192 Claire Young: Are there any gaps you would identify in that oversight?
Stuart Okin: The gaps are the ones that I have mentioned earlier on.
There are quite a few gaps and they will be addressed by the Cyber
Security and Resilience Bill, the supply chain being an example of that.
Deborah Petterson: The threat changes fast. When it comes to an
outcome-based system, for us it is often loss of load expectation or the
ability to restore in certain timeframes, because you cannot predict what
the threat of the future will be. We have been admired overseas for
having regulation that is outcome-focused, which does not assume a
certain type of threat and a certain type of attack, and I think that is
right.
We do observe gaps, and one of the benefits of the policy Department
not being present in NESO’s governance to create that independence
means that we can observe, which can obviously bring a healthy tension
sometimes between the policy Department and NESO. An example of that
was observing where there was regulatory uncertainty in North Hyde and
observing where there were issues that needed to be addressed by
Ofgem and DESNZ in who was responsible in certain areas. We are
empowered to do that with the duty of candour that NESO has on risk.
Q193 Claire Young: Do you feel that your feedback on that is being listened
to?
Deborah Petterson: They accepted every recommendation from North
Hyde. Another example where again it was an uncomfortable message
was our gas security of supply assessment, where last October we
published the report that observed an emerging risk to our gas security
of supply in five and 10 years’ time. The Secretary of State ordered an
immediate consultation on how to mitigate that risk that was emerging.
Stuart Okin: I was just going to say very quickly, one recommendation,
as we move forward in the Cyber Security and Resilience Bill, is: do not
be too prescriptive. There is always this challenge or there is this need to
write everything down and to specify what every organisation should do.
The problem with that is that we move so fast or whatever is written is
out of date as soon as you write it, so be high level. One of the beauties
of the new regulation is that an appropriate proportion of it is very high
level.
Q194 Claire Young: One final very quick question. Stuart, how do you assess
the adequacy of funding for cyber-security upgrades under the RIIO-3
price control framework?
Stuart Okin: For RIIO-2 and ED2, that period, about £2 billion was
allocated for cyber, although that includes some control room upgrades,
some big areas. That is not just for upgrades, that is for operations as
well, the whole area. For RIIO-3, £1.2 billion has been allocated to the
security side of things. Again, that includes full operations. In the RIIO-2
and ED2 period, the previous period, that created about 2,000 roles
inside the sectors, which I think is incredibly important—you need to
have that capability. As I said, that is where we are starting to see the
sea change.
Q195 Torcuil Crichton: I am going to ask some questions about gas security,
and, Deborah, for you to update us on what you have told the Ministers
about that. First, you have been in cyber-security, infrastructure security,
running the risk assessments for over two decades. Do you sleep at
nights, should we sleep at nights and should Ministers sleep at nights?
Deborah Petterson: Just over a decade on the national security side.
The UK is admired for the way in which the intelligence services have
reached out to industry and partners and are more open, and the
creation of the National Cyber Security Centre allowed for that. I feel that
my job is to have the sleeplessness on your behalf. Having been
immersed in the threat and the intent and the capability of those who
wish to do us harm, it is really serious and it is not something we take for
granted for the resilience of our system.
It has been fantastic joining NESO. There is a sense of mission by our
power system engineers to maintain a secure and resilient system—itis
like it is in their DNA. It feels like a very similar environment to that in
national security. Therefore, our ability now to reach into the national
security community, the outreach by defence and home defence to
ensure we have greater and deeper partnerships, the information sharing
that is being set up and is starting to flow, means I think you can feel
confident in the UK, along with the real openness to the international
security roundtable I mentioned the first we had.
We had our Five Eyes nations with the Ukrainians, the Latvians, and the
Norwegians, talking through what it is like to have an aggressive
neighbour testing your infrastructure all the time or destroying it, and
then taking us through step by step what they are doing and what we
need to think about. It is important not to be complacent, but you have
an industry that really is not.
Stuart Okin: Just to add to that, you are two decades, mine is three
decades. You can sit there and get very depressed continuously reading
threat reports and risks and outages and also having to deal with them
on the ground. Therefore, you also have to balance that with the costs
that are associated with fixing that. Do we want to build bunkers around
every single substation, and so on? Is that appropriate?
There is a constant flow between that risk profile and then the cost of
repairing it, but I make no apologies. We have fined £30 million-worth of
fines under NIS because we had not seen appropriate and proportionate
action being taken, and we do so. I think that is where we have to take
action.
Deborah Petterson: We must, of course, add we have an incredibly
resilient grid—like, 99.999% resilience; it is one of the best in the world.
I think that diversity of energy sources, the redundancy we have in the
system already, and although that has been there—it was designed
between the war periods to be a resilient grid in wartime, and it is
absolutely right. We reassess the geopolitical threat.
The grid has been designed and our markets have been designed to drive
efficiency and lower cost, but cost, resilience and clean are like three
dials that we have to dial up and down depending on circumstance, and it
is for Ministers to decide at any time where that priority is. We will always
prioritise a secure grid, but we need to build in deep, increasing
redundancy, increasing resilience. I think there is an active conversation
at the moment about whether we can justify that investment.
At NESO, we have literally just been given the resource to create a new
team, to look at cascade and compounding risk, to see if there is a sweet
spot where we can invest that gives us both security, clean and
affordable all in one place. I look forward to telling you more about that
in future.
Q196 Torcuil Crichton: Can I ask your advice to Ministers on the gas network
resilience there, where we get it from the North sea, from Norway, from
through Europe and LNG?
Deborah Petterson: That is absolutely right.
Torcuil Crichton: What is your advice to me on what the best and most
cost-effective way of securing gas supply is?
Deborah Petterson: As I have mentioned, we provide this independent
assessment and analysis to Government on any risk to the system, and a
fundamental tenet of resilience is having adequate resources, and gas is
an integral part of our system. We are required under licence to publish
each year a five and 10-year outlook on security of supply, and there is
an emerging risk. The Secretary of State acted immediately on that to do
a consultation that closed—I think it was about three or four months
ago—and we are looking forward to hearing the assessment and how and
what the approach will be to addressing that risk.
For me, as I have mentioned before, like with our supply chain, with our
types of energy, equally with gas, having that diverse mix of gas—just to
assure people in the middle east—this Committee is probably all aware
but I do not think the public are—that we only secured 5% of our
resources from the middle east. The vast majority of gas that we do not
take from the North sea was secured from the US and Canada. After
2022, the gas split into two basins, with the middle east going towards
the east and Asian nations and Europe being supplied by Australia,
Canada, America. What we had anticipated before the conflict was the
gas markets going to oversupply by the end of this year. In some ways,
the conflict has brought it back into balance, but there is no shortage of
gas molecules.
Q197 Torcuil Crichton: All that imported stuff is LNG that comes in?
Deborah Petterson: Yes.
Q198 Torcuil Crichton: How do we deal with the scenario of peak winter
demand and bad weather and tankers trying to get into ports, for
example? Have you looked at that?
Deborah Petterson: Yes. As I said, that comes into the modelling of
30,000 weather scenarios every single day. In the UK we have a security
of supply standard, and that is that we have sufficient margins to supply
gas on a cold day, which is a one-in-20 cold day—that is a period,
actually, which stretches to 11 days, so we are looking across an 11-day
cold, grey, still period—and with the loss of our largest piece of
infrastructure. We compound both those things and then if we have
sufficient margin to take us through our peak demand—for this January, I
think our peak demand was about 45 GW—we feel we have sufficient
supply. That is a security of supply standard we thought might to be at
risk in five and 10 years’ time that is looking forward to address now.
Q199 Torcuil Crichton: What is best to guarantee gas supplies? Should we
build more storage? Should we import more energy? Should we take
more out of the North sea?
Stuart Okin: Again, I am going to push back and say that is a decision
for DESNZ.
Deborah Petterson: I think it is absolutely right that we have this broad
and diverse range. You mentioned we have the Norwegian continental
shelf and the UK continental shelf, which still provides just over a third of
our gas. We have LNG and we have storage, and we have the
interconnector to Europe. We have this basket of supplies that means we
are not reliant on one single thing. The North sea is declining and it is
declining at a faster rate, but of course we still have that and it is still
there.
Stuart Okin: NESO are working on the spatial planning as well, so that
will have a big influence on the design of the future.
Q200 Ms Polly Billington: I want to follow up, before I go to my international
co-ordination question, on your reference to the people who do this as
the sort of Dad’s Army of the 21st century, which I like. I also note,
however, that in the strategy it cites the fact that the UK faces a
significant shortage of professionals who have the required combination
of cyber and engineering skills with an insufficient number of securitycleared industry staff. Whose responsibility is it to tackle that problem?
Stuart Okin: I would say it is all of our responsibilities.
Ms Polly Billington: Forgive me Stuart, when it is everybody’s
responsibility it ends up being nobody’s.
Stuart Okin: It is no one’s responsibility, no, I get that. At the moment
DSIT is running a big programme to try to improve that, but when I say it
is all, we have been encouraging our operators of essential services to
reach out, have apprentice schemes to connect in to do that training.
There is a responsibility on ourselves to make sure that as part of the
investment funds that are coming through RIIO, which was mentioned
earlier, there is the ability to train an apprentice.
There are responsibilities there and then you have DSIT that takes a
broader perspective on these things. It is a challenge and there is no
doubt about that. I remember reading a report that said one in three
posts are not being filled, which is not good. It is something that we all
need to focus on. We have been running campaigns and we have had no
shortage of applicants. For any particular campaign that we run we will
get 500 applicants coming through. It is then making sure that they have
the right skillsets. In Ofgem we pride ourselves on training people
through. We bring them in early careers, train them through, and then if
they leave and join the industry, so be it. It is something that we have
responsibility for across the piece, but I understand your point.
Deborah Petterson: Skills is not an area that NESO covers, but we have
our own apprenticeships. I know from my experience in the National
Cyber Security Centre, the CyberFirst programme, the CyberGirls
programme—I have always thought there should be a CyberSecond, so
that would be my hat, a scheme for people looking to retrain. There is a
degree to which the frontier AI will support building those skills and
provide the tooling that is needed at greater scale. I know that there is a
lot of government programmes in this space and we are certainly
involved in the apprenticeships.
Q201 Ms Polly Billington: How serious is it as a risk? It feels a bit like our
frontier is short-staffed.
Stuart Okin: It is a risk. I am not sure I have a number to put on to the
risk. As I say, 2,000 roles have been created in the last few years, and
been filled, and they cross everything from policy right through to
engineers. We have some of the best universities in the country and
some great apprentice schemes. It is a risk and something to be
constantly focused on, but I would not put a number against it per se.
Q202 Ms Polly Billington: My final question is about international coordination. We went as a Select Committee to Brussels and visited NATO,
talked to them about energy security and how it links into national
security, as you mentioned, Deborah. How has sharing best practice with
Five Eyes nations helped to better protect the UK’s national
infrastructure?
Deborah Petterson: We had an excellent meeting, and it is the Five
Eyes learning from our European partners, too. In fact in my team we
have one of the UK NATO expert advisers; my head technical officer for
resilience also supports the UK in that way. Some of the best practice
that the Five Eyes nations brought—New Zealand on that, the isolating—I
think it is bringing up the drawbridge and operating independently and
they talked us through that.
AEMO, our Australian partners, were talking through how they do wholesector live exercising every year, and that is something we are certainly
going to look to explore and how we could roll out with NESO, where you
bring—and not just desk-based, like doing operational exercising across
all market participants annually. Texas is talking through some of its
work with data centre and intelligence sharing, and there is something
called the Lighthouse Project in Canada, where they have this very deep
partnership of how they enrich intelligence for their energy sector and get
that out.
Equally, they were fascinated hearing Latvian stories, about how they are
managing drones, the Norwegian total defence concept that you
referenced earlier, and of course the Ukrainians talking about how they
are securing their substations against drone attack and conflict. It was a
really meaningful exchange, and we will be meeting with them in a
couple of months’ time to then decide the next steps of following up.
Another area involving the Five Eyes—actually, it was not that particular
roundtable, but my team went for the first time to Washington for Five
Eyes on space weather. Not all risks are geopolitical in nature; some are
just the sun. The UK was in a period of intense solar activity that can
have an impact on our grid and our digital infrastructure and how it
operates. My team have worked with industry and partnerships to come
up with new guidance, new codes for how we manage this period of high
solar activity. Partly it is the Met Office supporting so we can predict it,
and now we have rehearsed processes and exercises in place so we know
how to step through that.
But New Zealand is well ahead on that and they have already rolled out
some of the things that we are planning, and were able to say, “Actually
do less of that, do more of that, we invested there, we recommend”. The
ability to share information freely and openly is enabling us to learn the
lessons of others before we make mistakes ourselves.
Stuart Okin: That is a long list, so I will keep my list very short. We
have to work internationally on all areas. Two years ago, as an example,
we were involved in a European exercise—the very first European
exercise on cyber—even though we were outside Europe but we were
invited to participate. Ofgem participated in that.
One of my members is a voting member for the 62443 standard, which is
an international standard that everybody looks to from the operational
technology perspective in cyber and energy, and indeed in other areas
like water and so on. Looking at the internal energy markets and coming
together on that requires even further integration potentially with our
European colleagues. There is a lot of work that we do.
To finish off, again, my pick on the area of supply chain, there is no way
that any single country can dictate a supply chain. It has to be an
international effort because we have suppliers coming from all sorts of
places. We are very lucky in the UK. We have General Electric and
Schneiders and a few others where they send to themselves software
development here in the UK. That is very good but we cannot rely on
that. We have to work with our international partners, especially the Five
Eyes, in developing standards and guidance, and so on to help the supply
chain secure us through the future.
Q203 Chair: To come back, Stuart, to what you said about the European
energy market, how important do you think it is that we have closer
integration in energy? We have seen the discussions around closer ties,
but there is some way to go in finalising arrangements. What is your
position on where you think we need to get to?
Stuart Okin: Again, I want to be very clear, it is DESNZ’s decision on
internal markets and our integration.
Chair: But as you mentioned it.
Stuart Okin: But as I mentioned it, we obviously therefore will respond
to that. DESNZ has said it is looking towards that, so we need to
respond. Our response from a cyber perspective is to look into what we
need to do differently. Things have moved on in the last few years, and
generally a lot of the guidance and standards in Europe still have not
been ratified themselves. We are in a very good place to be able to
integrate from a cyber perspective. I think that a little bit more work will
be required to make sure that we are at various parts of the various
different committees that are run there. But in enacting it within the UK,
if we decide that is the route that the Government wish to take, from a
cyber perspective it will be okay.
Q204 Chair: What about from a supply perspective, supply of energy, energy
resilience?
Deborah Petterson: We are physically connected to 10 European
nations. Our control room is speaking every single day to our European
partners on managing supply and connection. Also we have been invited
as NESO again, because we are set slightly apart from Government, to sit
and observe on ENTSO-E. We are part of Coreso and part of the Hamburg
Declaration on the North sea and offshore co-operation. As I said, there is
real openness to partner and regularly partnering and speaking and
joining. While we will also give formal advice to DESNZ and the Cabinet
Office on any negotiations looking at the formal European arrangements,
informally, on a partnership level, we are working with them day in, day
out.
Q205 Chair: Deborah, to come back to what you have been saying about
civilian and military resources working together—and in particular you
quoted the Norwegian approach—it strikes me what you are advocating
here is seeing the energy resilience funding that we have, whether it is
with NESO or more widely, as a part of defence. It feels like you are
suggesting that doing something along those lines would be helpful.
Deborah Petterson: I would not dream of suggesting how the
Government spend its money. However, it is absolutely true that article 3
of NATO talks about resilient grid infrastructure. Article 3 is how we
defend and look after our own nation, and a resilient grid infrastructure is
listed as one of the elements. I have certainly been talking to home
defence, understanding joint command in MOD about our closer
partnership in this space.
Q206 Chair: Even if we do not formally allocate it as defence spending, we
should be confident in seeing it in those terms?
Deborah Petterson: I would describe energy as mission-vital
infrastructure for defence, and therefore would expect them to be
extremely interested in the resilience of our grid.
Chair: That is very helpful. Thank you, both, for your extremely helpful
and informative evidence, and that ends our session.